---
marp: true
theme: scratch
math: mathjax
author: R. Johnson
---

# A Level Physics OCR A

## 4 Electons, waves and photons

### 4.4 Waves

---

# Do It Now!

## Prior knowledge check :teacher:

1. Give an example of a longitudinal wave.
2. How are longitudinal and transverse waves different?
3. Sketch a _wave profile_. Label the words _amplitude_, _wavelength_, _displacement_.
4. Sketch what this wave profile would look like _half a period later_.

---

# 4.4.1 Wave motion

1. progressive waves; longitudinal and transverse waves

2. displacement, amplitude, wavelength, period, phase difference, frequency and speed of a wave

3. the equation $f = \frac{1}{T}$

4. the wave equation $v = f\lambda$

5. graphical representations of transverse and longitudinal waves

6. reflection, refraction, polarisation, and diffraction of all waves; techniques and procedures used to demonstrate wave effects using a ripple tank ; techniques and procedures used to observe polarising effects using microwaves and light

7. intensity of a progressive wave $I = \frac{power}{area}$, intensity $\propto \text{amplitude}^2$

---

# Progressive waves

Transfer _energy_ from one place to another, without a transfer of matter.

<script src="/js/wave-motion.js" type="module"></script>

<wave-motion></wave-motion>

- This wave is travelling :arrow_right:.
- The _peaks_ and _troughs_ move in the direction of the wave.
- The particles on the left hand side move _first_.

---

# Transverse wave directions

The waves are travelling in _opposite directions_.
<wave-motion velocity="-200"></wave-motion>

<wave-motion velocity="200"></wave-motion>

---

# Transverse waves

This wave is _transverse_.

<wave-motion></wave-motion>

> The particles in a transverse wave move _perpendicular_ to the _velocity_ of the wave.

---

# Longitudinal waves

This wave is _longitudinal_.

<wave-motion type='longitudinal' amplitude="30" numberofparticles="34" height="100"></wave-motion>

> In a longitudinal wave, particles move _parallel_ to the _velocity_ of the wave.

---

# Compressions and rarefactions

- Compressions are when particles are _close together_ (high _pressure_).
- Rarefactions are when particles are _far apart_ (low _pressure_).
- At every position of zero displacement, compressions and rarefactions **alternate**.
  <wave-motion type="longitudinal" amplitude="30" state="stop" height="100"></wave-motion>

The distance between two nearest compressions (or rarefactions) is _one wavelength_.

---

# Longitudinal wave directions

- The waves are travelling in _opposite directions_.
- Notice how the compressions move in the direction of the wave.

<wave-motion type="longitudinal" velocity="-300" amplitude="80" height="70"></wave-motion>

<wave-motion type="longitudinal" velocity="300" amplitude="80" height="70" ></wave-motion>

---

# Examples of waves

Transverse waves include...

- waves on a string
- seismic '**S**' waves are tran**s**verse
- all electromagnetic waves (light, radio...)

Longitudinal waves include...

- sound
- seismic 'P' waves

---
