---
marp: true
theme: uncover
math: mathjax
paginate: true
author: R. Johnson
---

# 4 Atomic structure

## 4.3 Hazards and uses of radioactive emissions and of background radiation (physics only)

### 4.3.3 Uses of nuclear radiation

---

# :blue_book: Do It Now!

1. What is X in $\ce{^{210}_{84}Po -> ^{206}_{X}Pb + ^4_2\alpha}$
2. State the nature of a beta particle.
3. What is the mass number of an alpha particle?
4. Medical sterilisation: contamination or irradiation?
5. What is the form of radiation with the greatest ionising power?
6. An atom loses two electrons. What charge does it have?

---

## 4.3.3 Uses of nuclear radiation

### Learning Objectives

- _list_ medical uses of nuclear radiation
- _evaluate_ medical uses of nuclear radiation
- _discuss_ perceived risks of radiation
- _explain_ why the hazards associated with radioactive material differ according to the half-life involved.

---

# Medical uses of radiation

- **gamma rays** are used to treat **cancer** (**radiotherapy**)
- **gamma** isotopes are used as **tracers**, e.g.
  - radioactive **iodine** for hyperthyroidism
  - radioctive **fluorine** is used in PET scans
  - **technetium-99m** is used as a gamma source

---

#### Tracers and P.E.T. scans

<iframe width="100%" height="100%" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/KXzONBPcPIk?si=3Nmqgj4b56U4kSU1" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

## Video Questions

1. What is the radioactive form of glucose called?
2. What is the particle accelerator called?
3. Which isotope is bombarded with protons to become fluorine-18?
4. What is the approximate half-life of fluorine-18?
5. What does PET stand for?
6. What happens to the positron and the electron when they meet?
7. What is the dose of one scan equivalent to?

---

# Evaluation of Medical Uses

- tracers and radiotherapy can **kill normal cells**
- radiotherapy can help to destroy **cancer**
- radiologists must choose an appropriate **dose**
- **half-life** must be long enough to carry out treatment, but not too long

---

## Perceived risks of radiation

- **side effects** e.g. radiation sickness
- **benefits** can outweigh **risks**
- the risk depends on the individual **patient**

---

# Task

1. Create a **Venn diagram** to illustrate the similarities and differences between the PET scanner and imaging using technetium 99-m.
2. 