---
marp: true
theme: uncover
paginate: true
author: R. Johnson
style: |
  section.objectives > ol > li {
      list-style-type: lower-alpha;
  }
---

# Discuss in pairs

1. :radioactive: What is radioactivity?
2. What happens during radioactive decay?
3. What makes an atomic nucleus unstable?

---

# 4 Atomic structure

## 4.2 Atoms and nuclear radiation

### 4.2.1 Radioactive decay and nuclear radiation

---

## 4.2.1 Radioactive decay and nuclear radiation

- State the origin of nuclear radiation as instability in the atomic nucleus.
- Describe the random nature of radioactive decay
- State the definition of activity and the unit (becquerel - Bq)
- Use the idea of count rate and link to activity

---

# :radioactive: What is radioactivity?

An **unstable** atomic nucleus undergoes **radioactive decay**.

---

# What happens during radioactive decay?

- An atomic **nucleus** releases a **particle** of radiation (alpha, beta, or gamma).
- The **atomic number** or **mass number** might change.
- The new nucleus could be **stable** or **unstable**.

---

## What makes an atomic nucleus unstable?

Some **isotopes** are **unstable**, and some are **not**.

### Example

**Carbon 12** is **stable**, but **carbon 14** is radioactive.

---

# Radioactive decay is **random** :game_die:

We cannot predict when an atomic nucleus will decay.

---

# Is radioactivity dangerous? :radioactive:

Yes and no.

Radioactivity is all around us.

But high levels of radioactivity can be dangerous.

---

# What is **activity**?

- The **activity** of a radioactive source is the **total** amount of radiation given off **per second**.
- It is measured in **becquerels** (Bq).
- One becquerel is equivalent to one count per second.

---

# How do we measure radioactivity?

- We use a radiation detector.
- It measures **count rate**.
- **Count** rate is proportional to **activity**.
