---
marp: true
theme: uncover
math: katex
class: invert
---

# :blue_book: Do It Now! :+1:

1. State the part of the electromagnetic spectrum used for satellite communications.
2. What happens to the speed of light when it travels from glass into air?
3. What is the unit of electric current?
4. Give an example of a longitudinal wave.
5. What is the unit of activity?
6. What is the composition of an alpha particle?
7. What is the relative mass of a beta particle?
8. How many neutrons does $^{209}_{83}Bi$ have?

---

## 4.2.2 Nuclear equations

- Write or complete nuclear equations for alpha and beta decay.
- State that the nucleus remains unchanged upon the release of a gamma ray.

---

# Strontium 90

Strontium-90 is a **beta-emitter**.

- In the 1950s, lots of nuclear weapons testing was carried out.
- This led to lots of strontium-90 in the atmosphere.
- This could have led to many people getting disease as a result - but we don't know for sure.

---

# Beta Decay

A **neutron** changes into a **proton** and a **beta particle**.

## Example

Strontium-90 decays into yttrium-90.

$$^{90}_{38}\text{Sr} \rightarrow ^{90}_{39}\text{Y} + _{-1}^0\beta$$

- the electron has a **mass number** of **zero**
- the proton number increases by 1
- the mass number doesn't change

---

# Alpha decay

## Example

Bismuth 209 decays via alpha decay to tellurium 205.

$$^{209}_{83}\text{Bi} \rightarrow ^{205}_{83}\text{Tl} + ^4_2\alpha \isotope[54][Fe]$$

- total **mass** and total **atomic number** do not change.
- the mass number of the element decreases by 4.
- the atomic number decreases by 2.

---
